There are times when you wanna force the compiler
to overlook its narrowing and widening checks,
because you have knowledge of the actual values occurring
in the programme during execution.
You can do this by using casting.
So you cast by referencing the type you want
to be widened, or narrowed to in parenthesis
preceding the variable or value that
is to be converted.
You can cast to a larger sized variable, widening.
This is more common case and poses less risk
since there is no risk of loss of value.
But you can also cast to a smaller
sized variable, narrowing.
There may be a valid case for this,
however, be aware that unexpected results may occur.
Perhaps you want to use a method that requires
a smaller variable type, and you know your value
will not exceed the smaller
variable range at the time of execution.
Okay, so continuing on with our primitive data project,
let's create a class called casting example
and I'll place the code in.
So you can see we're setting up some local variables
at lines 12 and 13, 15 and 16.
We're using a for loop, and forcing the for loop
to stay in the valid range of a short there
by using the short.min_value and short.max_value.
And looking at this code, we know because
of the way we've written the code that i would never
be outside the range of a short, and as such,
we can confidently cast i to s2 as a short,
and then we're putting out some information at
lines 26 through 27.
Then we also need to pass the short
to a method that we've created.
So we're passing s2, not our loop variable i.
You can see that til on line 31.
Then we're just putting out some output
and there's our callAMethodWithParameter int i, short s.
Then you can see you really only want this to print once,
though it's called in a loop, so if we run this code...
So the output for this code is shown
as you can see from the screen and the results
are what we expected.
The minimum value equals short.min_value and
the maximum value equals short.max_value,
and the number of iterations represents the
different short values that can be stored
in a short variable.
The last iteration contained the maximum
value for the short.
So all is well there so far.
So what happens now if our code is changed
by some new developer after we've moved on
and they make two minor changes altering min value
and max value as we'll do here?
So if we go back to these values here at line 15,
remember, we've got int minValue equals short.min_value
so let's actually change that.
We're going to put minus one for our min value
and for max value, we're gonna change that
by putting a plus one.
So that's pretty innocent.
Why even test it?
But we'll all do it anyway just in case.
So we'll actually run this now.
All right, now as you can see, you've got some
unexpected output.
Loop iterations looks correct.
Two more loop iterations than previously.
But, why is minimum value now equal to short.max_value?
And why is maximum value now equal to short.min_value?
And also why did the method print out information
for two iterations as it's doing now?
Well, the problem with casting is that if your value
doesn't fall into the valid value range,
your data may underflow or overflow.
Underflow is defining or casting a value
less than the minimum value for the datatype.
Overflow is defining or casting a value
greater than the maximum value for the datatype.
In the example that I've just demonstrated,
we've created both of these conditions, so that
the s2 value in order were 32767.
This is what happens when you underflow a short by 1.
The sign bit gets toggled and now value is short.max_value,
probably not what you intended.
And secondly, the s2 value was minus 32768.
So the 65534 values between minus 32768 and 32767.
And then 32767 and minus 32768,
now minus 32768 this is what happens
when you overflow a short by 1.
The sign bit gets toggled and
now the value is short.min_value.
Again, probably not what you expected or wanted.
In some cases you might want to cast to a less precise
data type, from a float or double to an int or long,
for example.
This will truncate the number to a whole number.
And I'll create a quick example here,
just to show you this.
I'm going to go ahead and do that and create a new class.
We'll call this Truncate Number.
And if you run this,
you'll see the result is myNumber equals 123
Float.intValue equals 123.
So clearly what we're doing there is
truncating the result because we're converting
from a float, in this case, to an int.
All right, so we're gonna end the video here.
We've talked about narrowing and widening
for literals, as well as for variables.
And also shown when the Java compiler allows it
and when it doesn't.
You can always force the compiler's hand
and use a cast, but you should always ask yourself
why you need a cast, and evaluate the risks associated
with casting and try to code for those risks.
The next video we're going to explore our types
related to primitive data types and their initializations
that you may never run across in your daily developer life,
but may find their way on the certification exam.
And then after that, there'll be a quiz.
We'll go through what we learned in this section
of the course.
See you in the next video.